#+AUTHOR: smabie
#+CATEGORY:Posts
#+DATE:2020-07-29
#+MATHJAX:true
#+STARTUP:showeverything
#+TITLE:Risk Imparity: A Simple Strategy for Alpha Generation

Risk parity is a popular method of investing that aims to outperform
the traditional 60/40 equity/bond portfolio by equalizing the risk of
the bond portion with that of the equity part of the portfolio and
then leveraging up the portfolio to hit the desired risk target. Using
the covariance, and volatility of the components, we can generate a
portfolio and leverage ratio for a given level of desired risk. This
works for two reasons: bonds have a low or inverse correlation to
equities and they generally have superior risk-adjusted returns as
well, and combining low correlation assets allows us to lower the
volatility of the portfolio. Bridgewater and Ray Dalio pioneered this
approach in the 90s with the introduction of his now famous /All
Weather/ fund.

The appeal of this approach is obvious compared to the 60/40
portfolio: by setting a volatility target, we stabilize our risk
throughout different market regimes. This is an attractive property
for investors who might otherwise choose a 60/40 or even all equity
portfolio; they can sleep well knowing an appropriate level of risk
will be taken, regardless of the market. Well, in this post, we're
going to take a less sensible approach and instead of equalizing the
risk in our portfolio, we're going to leverage up the equity component
(representing almost all of the risk of the portfolio) and use the
bonds to generate yield.

** Risk Imparity

   The intuition behind this approach is pretty straightforward: we
   want to take on leverage with equities and cancel out the leverage
   by choosing an appropriate weight. For example, if we purchased a
   2x bull leveraged S&P 500 ETF such as /SSO/, we would choose an
   appropriate weight to cancel out the leverage, 0.5 in this case. If
   we kept the rest of the money in cash, the return of the portfolio
   would only be slightly worse than that of the S&P 500, due to the
   0.90% expense ratio we pay. If we didn't have to pay an expense
   ratio, the return streams would look identical besides for perhaps
   some marginal tracking error. But if we instead invested the rest
   of the money in a low risk investment, such as investment grade
   bonds, we would earn yield on the money and diversify our
   portfolio. As long as the bonds contribute more profit than the
   cost of the expense ratio, the strategy should beat the vanilla
   index. Below is the strategy in full:

   1. Our portfolio will consist of two assets, /UPRO/, a 3x leveraged
      S&P 500 ETF, and /LQD/, an investment grade bond ETF.

   2. Each day, we will rebalance so that 1/3 of our portfolio is
      allocated towards /UPRO/ and 2/3s towards /LQD/.

   Let's look at the returns against the S&P 500 between 2009-06-26
   and 2020-07-28 (we choose the beginning date because /UPRO/ was at
   the beginning of 2009 and the data only became available for it at
   the start date):

   #+caption: Imparity Portfolio Returns
   [[file:/assets/iret.png]]

   Not bad, let's look at a table of metrics:

   | Metric      | Portfolio | S&P 500 |
   |-------------+-----------+---------|
   | Ann. Rets   |     18.1% |   14.1% |
   | Ann. Vol    |     18.4% |   17.4% |
   | Ann. Sharpe |      0.98 |    0.81 |
   | Beta        |      1.02 |     1.0 |

   The results are pretty impressive for such a simple strategy:
   better Sharpe ratio, comparable beta, and a 4% better annualized
   return, with only slightly higher volatility. One problem however,
   is apparent: if the traditional negative correlation between bonds
   and equities starts to break like it did during the start of
   Coronavirus, the portfolio takes a major hit, performing worse than
   the S&P 500. In order to confirm this, let's look at /LQD/ alone:

   #+caption: LQD Rets
   [[file:/assets/lqd.png]]

   And indeed, even investment grade bonds collapsed during the start
   of Coronavirus. But what about the Great Recession, how did the
   strategy perform then? We don't have real data from that
   time-period, but we can synthetically generate a comparable return
   stream by just multiplying /SPY/ by 3. This of course won't take
   into account the expense ratio of /UPRO/ and the tracking error,
   but the results should still be pretty similar. Let's take a look:

   #+caption: Synthetic Imparity Portfolio Returns
   [[file:/assets/siret.png]]

   Unlike during Coronavirus, The strategy held up pretty well during
   the crash of '07-08, returning approximately the same as a pure S&P
   500 portfolio. This might suggest a regime change in bond/equity
   correlation or a temporary blip that isn't indicative of future
   correlation.

** Conclusion

   Though there are risks associated with this strategy not present in
   a pure S&P 500 portfolio, in most market environments, this
   approach delivers a better risk-adjusted return without taking on
   any additional market risk. Another benefit of the strategy is its
   simplicity: by using only two different ETFs, a retail investor can
   manage the strategy with minimal effort. investor could also adjust
   the rebalancing period to weekly or monthly in order to reduce the
   complexity and transaction costs. The strategy can also be modified
   by adjusting the type of bond for the portfolio: more risk-averse
   investors could stick with short to medium term Treasury notes
   while higher octane ones could substitute in junk bonds or other
   alternative investments.

   Thanks for reading, hope you enjoyed this post. Click [[https://www.quantopian.com/posts/risk-imparity][here]] for the
   Quantopian notebook used. Seeing that this strategy is pretty
   trivial, if anyone could help me in locating prior literature about
   it, I would be most appreciative. Email me at [[mailto:sturm@cryptm.org][sturm@cryptm.org]] if
   so.
