#+AUTHOR: Sturm Mabie
#+CATEGORY:Posts
#+DATE:2020-08-01
#+MATHJAX:true
#+STARTUP:showeverything
#+TITLE:Portfolio Construction with Risk Parity

Just like how there's more than one way to skin a cat, there's more
than one way to construct a portfolio. The first systematic method of
construction was /Modern Portfolio Theory/, put forth by Harry
Markowitz. MPT's approach is simple: choose weights for each asset
that maximize the amount of return received for the amount of risk or
volatility taken. However, trying to maximize the risk-adjusted return
of a portfolio leads to very unstable allocations, as ex-ante
estimates of return are notoriously difficult and previous return
isn't a good predictor of future performance.

Another approach that came later is the minimum variance approach
which concerns itself with solely minimizing volatility, irrespective
of return. While this method might converge on sub-optimal portfolios
according to MPT, they tend to be a lot more stable as volatility is
easier to forecast than returns. Minimum variance optimization too
suffers from some problems: without any constraints, the minimum
variance portfolio often heavily weights only a few different assets,
suggesting minimal allocations in the rest. For example, given two
assets, a stock and a bond, the minimum variance method would almost
always return a portfolio in which the bond was allocated the vast
majority of the capital. Even if it produced reasonable results, the
results are highly unstable: the change in portfolio weights year to
year or even month to month can be massive.

For more background on both MPT and minimum variance optimization,
check out one of my previous posts:[[https://cryptm.org/posts/2020/07/09/alt.html][ The Value of Alternative
Investments]].  In the mid-90s, a third approach was discovered by the
hedge fund /Bridgewater/, founded by Ray Dalio, that tries remedy some
of the problems with both of the aforementioned portfolio construction
methods: risk parity.

** Math of Risk Parity

   Risk parity is a conceptually simple approach to portfolio
   construction in which we try and construct a portfolio in which each
   asset contributes a commensurate level of risk to the portfolio. In
   contrast to a traditional 60/40 portfolio in which the equity
   component is contributing almost all of the risk, risk parity tries to
   equalize the risk between each asset. In the two asset case of
   equities and bonds, the risk parity approach would spit out a set of
   weights so that each asset contributes equally to the volatility of
   the overall portfolio. To do this, it would most likely heavily weight
   the bond compared to the equity. After the weights are determined, the
   portfolio would be leveraged up in order to match a investor defined
   volatility budget. With this approach, we often end up with a better
   risk-adjusted return than a 60/40 portfolio and also get the benefits
   on diversification, unlike with a minimum variance portfolio.

   We're going to use the example of a two asset portfolio with
   allocation weights $x_a$ and $x_b$ and standard deviations $\sigma_a$
   and $\sigma_b$. To keep things explicit, we're going to eschew matrix
   notation. As we showed in the blog post linked above, the variance of
   the entire portfolio is:

   $$\sigma_P = x_a^2\sigma_a^2 + x_b^2\sigma_b^2 + 2 x_a x_b \sigma_a \sigma_b \rho$$

   Where $\rho$ is the standard correlation between $x_a$ and
   $x_b$. So now we want to divide up the risk so that they equal each
   other. But how do we do that?

   To start off, we can use Euler's homogeneous function theorem to
   help. Euler's theorem states that if a function is homogeneous, i.e:

   $$ f(tx, ty) = t^n f(x, y)$$

   Then:

   $$n t^{n-1} f(x, y)= x \frac{\partial f}{\partial (x\,t)} + y\frac{\partial f}{\partial (y\,t)}$$

   In the case of $t=1$:

   $$n f(x, y) =x\frac{\partial f}{\partial x} + y\frac{\partial f}{\partial y}$$

   Well, it turns out that our equation for $\sigma_P(x_a, x_b)$ is
   homogeneous. By using Euler's theorem, we can figure out how to
   split up the risk for each asset. First let's calculate the partial
   derivative with respect to each variable:

   $$\frac{\partial \sigma_P}{\partial x_a} = 2(\rho\sigma_a\sigma_b x_b + \sigma_a^2x_a)$$

   $$\frac{\partial \sigma_P}{\partial x_b}= 2(\rho \sigma_{a} \sigma_{b} x_{a} +\sigma_{b}^{2} x_{b})$$

   $$n \sigma_P = 2x_a(\rho\sigma_a\sigma_b x_b + \sigma_a^2x_a) + 2x_b(\rho \sigma_{a} \sigma_{b} x_{a} +\sigma_{b}^{2} x_{b})$$

   Simplifying and solving for $n$ we get:

   $$n = \frac{2x_a(\rho\sigma_a\sigma_b x_b + \sigma_a^2x_a) + 2x_b(\rho \sigma_{a} \sigma_{b} x_{a} +\sigma_{b}^{2} x_{b})}{\sigma_P} = 2$$

   We want each component to be equal:

   $$\frac{\partial \sigma_P}{\partial x_a}=\frac{\partial \sigma_P}{\partial x_b}$$

   $$\rho\sigma_{a}\sigma_{b}x_{a}x_{b}+\sigma_{a}^{2}x_{a}^{2} =\rho \sigma_{a} \sigma_{b} x_{a} x_{b} + \sigma_{b}^{2} x_{b}^{2}$$


   Assuming:

   $$x_a + x_b = 1$$

   We substitute $x_b = x_a - 1$ and then solve for $x_a$. Discarding
   the negative solution, we get:

   $$x_a = \frac{\sigma_b}{\sigma_a + \sigma_b}$$

   And solving for $x_b$:

   $$x_b = \frac{\sigma_a}{\sigma_a+\sigma_b}$$

   Note that the solution does not depend on the correlation $\rho$,
   which some might find counter-intuitive. While we showed that there
   exists a closed form solution for the case of two assets, a
   numerical solution is required when $n>2$.

** Risk Parity in Practice

   We're going to construct a risk-parity portfolio from two assets:
   /SPY/ (S&P 500), and /LQD/, which is an investment grade bonds
   ETF. Our weights will be calculated as described above, using a
   252-day rolling window for the volatility calculations. Below is a
   graph of the weights over time:

   #+caption: Two asset risk parity weights
   [[file:/assets/rpw.png]]

   As expected, bonds make up the majority of the portfolio in order
   to match the risk of the equity component. Let's look at the
   cumulative returns of our risk parity portfolio compared to a
   traditional 60/40 portfolio:

   #+caption: 60/40 vs risk parity
   [[file:/assets/rp64.png]]

   Due to the majority of our risk parity portfolio being bonds, the
   portfolio underperforms a classic 60/40 portfolio that takes on
   significantly more equity risk. Having a relatively low natural
   return is expected of a risk parity portfolio, which is why
   leveraged is applied after portfolio construction. But what
   leverage ratio to use? In order to have an apples-to-apples
   comparison between a risk parity portfolio and a 60/40 one, we will
   leverage up in order to try and match the volatility of a 60/40
   portfolio:

   $$l = \frac{\sigma_{60/40}}{\sigma_{RP}}$$

   For each $\sigma$, we use a 252-day rolling window. We calculate
   the leverage ratio needed on each day and leverage up
   accordingly. Ideally, this will ensure that the amount of risk
   taken by the risk parity portfolio is always inline with the amount
   of risk a 60/40 portfolio is taking. Let's look at a graph of our
   leveraged risk parity portfolio, a classic 60/40 portfolio, and the
   leverage ratio:

   #+caption: risk parity vs 60/40 vs leverage ratio
   [[file:/assets/rpr.png]]

   Not bad! The amount of leverage taken is reasonable and the
   performance of the risk parity portfolio looks pretty good. Let's
   look at a table of metrics:

   | Metric      | Risk Parity | 60/40 |
   |-------------+-------------+-------|
   | Beta        |        0.51 |  0.68 |
   | Ann. Ret    |        9.9% |  7.8% |
   | Ann. Vol    |       12.8% | 12.8% |
   | Ann. Sharpe |        0.77 |   0.6 |

   Our simple dynamic leverage strategy works very well, with the
   volatility of the two portfolios being identical. But even with the
   same volatility, the risk parity portfolio significantly
   outperforms while also having less beta exposure and a better
   Sharpe ratio as well. Another plus is that the amount of leverage
   taken is very reasonable, and well within the ability of even
   retail investors to obtain.

** Conclusion

   Risk parity is an exciting and effective technique that is a viable
   alternative to minimum variance portfolios as well as fixed weight
   portfolios such as 60/40. While risk parity portfolios might not
   reduce volatility as much as minimum variance portfolios, they tend
   to be more stable over time, incur less turnover, and provide
   greater diversification. Compared to a 60/40 portfolio, they are
   usually superior unless the borrowing costs are too high. This
   interest rate exposure represents a distinct risk for risk parity
   strategies; a risk investors should be cognizant of.

   Thanks for reading and hope you liked this post! You can check out
   the Quantopian notebook [[https://www.quantopian.com/posts/risk-parity][here]]. Feel free to change the time periods
   and assets used to construct the portfolio.
