---
author:
- Sturm Mabie
category: Posts
date: '2019-11-28'
mathjax: true
startup: showeverything
title: 'Diversification, Risk and Leverage'
---

Introduction
------------

In this post, we will look into the relationship between
diversification, risk, and leverage: first covering the history of
diversification and risk and then expounding upon the mathematical link
between leverage and diversification. Much of the material in the post
is related to another post of mine which you can view here: [ETFs,
Volatility and Leverage: Towards a New Leveraged ETF Part
1](https://smabie.github.io/posts/2019/10/04/vol.html).

While this article doesn\'t constitute the next post in the series (stay
tuned!), it covers some important ideas that I feel to have tangency to
the ideas put forth in the earlier post. So without further ado, let\'s
jump into the origins of diversification!

Background
----------

Diversification, the strategy of investing in multiple unique return
streams or investments simultaneously, has been a portfolio construction
technique used to mitigate risk for over thousands of years. The concept
is mentioned in several ancient religious texts, including the Bible and
Talmud, and came to prominence under the Roman Empire: investors would
form investment partnerships for particularly risky business endeavors,
such as financing the voyages of merchant vessels. While the original
purpose of these partnerships was to provide access to lucrative
investment vehicles for investors lacking sufficient capital to fund
such a voyage alone, they quickly became popular as risk-pooling
strategies; for even the richest Romans would often buy shares of many
different voyages in order to diversify the significant risk of any
single voyage.

The modern concept of diversification was popularized by Harry Markowitz
in the 1950s through his concept of a *Markowitz-efficient portfolio*
(MEP) and *Modern Portfolio Theory* (MPT). A MEP is a portfolio that
lowers the portfolio\'s volatility through diversification for a given
level of expected return. Or alternatively, the portfolio with the
lowest volatility possible (achieved primarily through diversification)
that still satisfies a minimum level of expected return. MPT and MEP
were the first formalizations of diversification put forth, creating a
framework for viewing the essence of a portfolio through its return and
volatility. of a portfolio through the return and volatility of the
portfolio. Using the example of a discretionary equity investor, the MEP
would consist of as many stocks as the investor could find or research
that would pass his investment criteria. Once the investor started
adding less desirable stocks (stocks with a lower expected return) that
culminate in a portfolio with lower return than the desired or expected
return, he no longer would hold a MEP.

More generally, Markowitz in MPT introduced the concept of the *Capital
Market Line* (CML):

![Capital Market Line](/assets/cml.png)

The efficient frontier is any portfolio that possesses the highest
risk-adjusted return: the portfolio that had the highest expected return
as a function of volatility. While any portfolio on the efficient
frontier is superior to any risky portfolio in the achievable region, by
using the risk-free rate to find the super-efficient portfolio, also
called the tangency or market portfolio, we can create a portfolio that
in a linear combination of risk-free assets and risky assets. By either
going long or short the risk-free rate (lending or borrowing), we can
achieve any level of return as a function of volatility or vice versa.
While this is not strictly true for a compounding portfolio due to
volatility drag (see my aforementioned post), the intuition behind it is
powerful. We can then see risk as a multiple on the volatility of the
super-efficient portfolio.

Later with the advent of the *Capital Asset Pricing Model* (CAPM) and
multi-factors, the concept of risk was partitioned into two primary
categories: systematic and specific risk. Unlike specific risk which can
be diversified away through the holding of a MEP or similar portfolio,
systematic risk cannot be easily diversified as it represents the latent
factors in which all assets have some exposure to. In the original
formulation of CAPM, specific risk was assumed to be zero and not
included in the equation:

$$r_i - r_f = r_f + \beta_i (r_m - r_f)$$

Where $\beta_i$ is $\frac{\text{Cov}(r_m,r_i)}{\text{Var}(r_m)}$, $r_f$
is the risk free rate, $r_i$ is the expected return of the asset $i$,
and $r_m$ the expected return of the market. The introduction of CAPM by
William Sharpe and others was the next pivotal step after MPT in
quantifying risk and transformation finance into a legitimate scientific
discipline. In CAPM, a portfolio\'s risk is defined as some multiple of
the market\'s risk, generally assumed to be the volatility of the
market. This important idea is best visualized by the Security Market
Line (SML):

![Security Market Line](/assets/sml.png)

Though under the CAPM model, investors may choose where on the line best
fulfills their investment goals ($\beta$) through portfolio
construction, they are not easily able to diversify away their market
risk since, by definition, their $\beta$ will converge to 1 as more and
more assets are added to the portfolio; nor can investors capture excess
returns relative to the market risk, as per the *Efficient Market
Hypothesis* both overvalued and undervalued stocks mispricings will be
arbitraged away. In it\'s essence, CAPM posits that investors are
compensated in the exact same proportion to the market risk assumed,
revealing an interesting property of specific risk: since specific risk
can easily be hedged away through the construction of a MEP, investors
are only compensated for systematic or market risk assumed, not specific
risk. A consequence of this is that investors are more likely to judge
an asset by its systematic risk versus its specific risk: an investment
with low sensitivity to the market but high specific risk may be judged
to have much less risk than a naive observer might expect.

In the next section, we look at the mathematics of diversification of
random variables.

Portfolio Variance and Diversification
--------------------------------------

An interesting proprety of diversification is that mathematically
speaking, with every new security we add to our portfolio, the
volatility of the portfolio monotonically decreases as long as two
conditions are met: the correlation of the new asset to any other asset
is less than 1, and that the sum of portfolio weights never increases.
Let\'s define a portfolio $P$ that is a linear combination of two
variables (assets):

$$P = x_A X_A + x_B X_B$$

where $x_A$ and $x_B$ are the proportion or weights of the assets in the
portfolio. While the returns of the portfolio are a linear combination
of the two return streams of the assets, the variance is:

$$\sigma_P^2 = x_A^2 \text{Cov}(r_A,r_A) + x_B^2\text{Cov}(r_B,r_B) + 2x_Ax_B\text{Cov}(r_A,r_B)$$

Though it may not be immediately obvious, the variance of the portfolio
will always be lower the more assets we add, as long as the
aforementioned conditions are met. With three or more assets, the
equation starts to become too unwieldy so instead, we often represent
the variance of a portfolio using matrices. Using the same example of
two assets, $A$ and $B$, we first define the covariance matrix:

$$\textbf{P}=\begin{bmatrix}
   \text{Cov}(r_A,r_A) & \text{Cov}(r_A,r_B) \\
   \text{Cov}(r_B,r_A) & \text{Cov}(r_B,r_B)
   \end{bmatrix}$$

Next we define our vector weights or proportions:

$$\textbf{x}=
   \begin{bmatrix}
   x_A \\
   x_B 
   \end{bmatrix}$$

Now we can define our variance in terms of the covariance matrix and the
vector weights:

$$\sigma_P^2 = \mathbf{x}^T\mathbf{Px}$$

This is often called the quad or quadratic form of $\mathbf{x}$ and
$\mathbf{P}$.

In the special case where:

$$x_A + x_B = 1$$

$$x = x_A = x_B$$

$$ \sigma = \sigma_A = \sigma_B$$

$$\rho_{AB} = 0$$

Then:

$$\textbf{x}=
   \begin{bmatrix}
   x \\
   x 
   \end{bmatrix}$$

$$\textbf{P}=\begin{bmatrix}
   \sigma^2 & 0 \\
   0 & \sigma^2
   \end{bmatrix}$$

$$\sigma_P^2 = \mathbf{x}^T\mathbf{Px} = \frac{\sigma}{\sqrt{2}}$$

In the general case of $n$ assets:

$$\sigma_n = \frac{\sigma}{\sqrt{n}}$$

The graph below visualizes the portfolio volatility as a function of
assets each with a standard deviation of 10%:

![Volatility vs Number of Assets](/assets/sqrtdev.png)

This graph makes it very clear on why investors are not compensated for
bearing specific risk: is is relatively easy to reduce much specific
risk by holding a relatively small number of assets in a portfolio. Even
though for equities in particular the volatility cannot be reduced as
much due to most equities being highly correlated to each other through
their common systematic risk factors, as we will see in the next sectio,
we can still get most of the way there with only 20-30 different
correlated assets.

In the next section, we will look at some market data and run some
simulations in order to better understand the affect of diversification
on a theoretical portfolio under real market conditions.

Diversification and Historical S&P 500 Returns
----------------------------------------------

To illustrate how diversification affects volatility and returns in a
real market environment, we ran a Monte Carlo simulation that generated
1000 random portfolios that long $n$ number of random stocks, where $n$
is all even numbers between 2 and 100, inclusively. All stocks are chose
from the S&P 500 and the daily portfolio returns are constructed between
2017-01-01 and 2019-01-01. Below is a graph of average annualized
volatility and return as a function of assets held:

![Volatility and Return as a Function of Number of
Assets](/assets/div.png)

In contrast to the essentially constant annual return as a function of
assets, the volatility exhibits a sharp downward trend before
stabilizing, reminiscent of the previous graph of perfectly uncorrelated
assets all sharing the same volatility. Since we are picking stocks
randomly, it is unsurprising that we trend toward the MEP with the same
expected level of return regardless of how many assets are in the
portfolio. Though not shown on the graph, the average annualized
volatility of our portfolio unsurprisingly trends quickly toward the
annualized volatility of the S&P 500 during that same period.

Leverage
--------

Despite the prior graph implying that the volatility and return of our
portfolio exist orthogonal to one another, in reality for a compounding
portfolio, this is not actually the case. The essence of the problem is
in the *AM-GM Inequality*, also called the inequality of arithmetic and
geometric means:

$$ \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n}x_i \geq \left(\prod_{i=1}^n x_i \right)^{1 \over n}$$

This equation implies that the arithmetic average of our returns will
only be accurate if and only if the return stays constant. Otherwise,
our true geometric returns will always lower than the arithmetic return.
Thus, due to the nature of compounding returns and geometric sums, the
volatility of our portfolio has a very real negative affect on our
long-term returns. This phenomenon is coined *volatility drag* and
increasingly penalizes portfolios with higher and higher volatility:

$$r_a = r_p - \frac{\sigma^2_p}{2}$$

Where $\sigma_p$ is the standard deviation of the portfolio, $r_p$ the
return of the portfolio and $r_a$ the actualized return of the portfolio
after accounting for volatility drag (for a more in-depth dive into
volatility drag see the link at the beginning of this post). Volatility
drag implies that not only should we aim to reduce volatility for the
classically given reasons, but that reducing volatility actually lets us
boost our returns, which means that diversification provides even more
benefit than we might otherwise think.

Leverage and Diversification
----------------------------

A key result of my linked post is the relationship between volatility,
return, and leverage. After a little bit of math we arrived at the
conclusion that in order to maximize our return, we should lever up our
portfolio as per the following equation:

$$l = \frac{r_b}{\sigma_b^2}$$

Some of the readers might notice the similarity between the ideal
leverage ratio and the fractional Kelly:

$$f^* = \frac{\mu-r}{\sigma^2}$$

Regardless, we can look at the ideal leverage ratio as a function of the
number of assets in our portfolio:

![Leverage vs Number of Assets](/assets/l.png)

We can see that the optimal leverage for maximizing the geometric growth
of our portfolio increases quickly relative to the number of assets in
our portfolio but also rapidly stabilizes at a leverage ratio between
4.5 and 5 between 2017-01-01 and 2019-01-01.

It is now evident that diversification can be used in one of two ways:
to reduce the uncompensated specific risk of a portfolio, or to increase
the amount of risk or leverage we as investors can take in order to
maximize the long-term geometric growth rate of our portfolio. In
general, we should always aim to maximize our risk while satisfying our
risk controls in order to generate the greatest possible return.
Diversification allows us to minimize specific risk, in which we are not
compensated for, giving us the opportunity to obtain risk for which we
*are* compensated for, namely, systematic risk.

Conclusion
----------

In this post we arrived at a couple important conclusions. We can easily
reduce our volatility through diversification, even when picking random
assets for our portfolio. Not only does this reduce our risk, but it has
the potential to boost our returns as well. Taking it a step further, we
can actually lever up our portfolio in order to maintain risk parity if
we so choose. Thus we can use diversification in one of two ways: to
either greatly reduce risk and modestly boost the compounded returns of
our portfolio, or to lever up the less risky diversified portfolio in
order to maximize the long-term geometric growth. Either way,
diversification is a powerful tool in an investor\'s toolbox and should
be exploited to its fullest potential. Furthermore, because
diversification reduces volatility drag and boosts our returns, in
addition to allowing us to take more leverage, it very well might make
sense to diversify past the point of a MEP, as the long-term compounded
savings could outweigh the decrease in single-period expected return.

Thanks for reading, I hope this was entertaining and informative! If you
want to check out the Quantopian notebook I made for this post, click
[here](https://www.quantopian.com/posts/diversification-risk-and-leverage)!
Feel free to experiment with different start and end dates, number of
assets, or trials. If you clone the notebook and play with it, you must
also put a file called \"SP500.csv\" in your data directory. Simply copy
the data off of Wikipedia or some other source and format it to be a one
column CSV file with the header \"Ticker\".

\(1) Check out my deep dive into volatility and leverage: [ETFs,
Volatility and Leverage: Towards a New Leveraged ETF Part
1](https://smabie.github.io/posts/2019/10/04/vol.html). It clarifies
some of the concepts in this post and derives the equation for leverage
that we used in the previous section.
