---
author:
- Sturm Mabie
category: Posts
date: '2019-10-02'
mathjax: true
startup: showeverything
title: 'ETFs, Volatility and Leverage'
---

Background
----------

The recent ascent of ETFs as one of the most popular trading vehicles
for both retail and institutional investors has dramatically affected
the business of all funds seeking retail flows, and even many who do
not. ETFs and ETNs serve as wrappers for a diverse array of strategies
that run the gamut from simple and transparent to complex and
proprietary. ETFs (and ETNs though for brevity\'s sake we will just
refer to all securities employing this legal structure as \"ETFs\") can
be placed on a two dimensional spectrum: simple to complex on one axis,
and transparent to proprietary on another. These products are united by
several distinguishing features: placement on public equity markets with
tickers alongside equities and a pricing mechanism that, also much like
equities, utilizes arbitrage and a bid-ask mechanism that is used by
market makers to provide liquidity. ETF shares are created and destroyed
in blocks as needed in order ensure that the value of the wrapper is
inline with the value of the underlying securities or strategy that the
ETF conceptually represents.

By far the most popular type of ETF in terms of total asset value and
flows are ETFs that provide exposure to popular indices such as the S&P
500, the Russell 2000, and many others. These ETFs simply aim to match
the relative daily returns of their respective index and occupy the
bottom left spot on the aforementioned two dimensional spectrum. A
closely related (albeit far less popular) type of product that occupies
the bottom middle is the leveraged ETF. A leveraged ETF seeks to obtain
a daily exposure on an underlying index scaled by a constant $l$; which,
at this time, is somewhere between -3 and 3. If $l$ is less than zero,
the ETF provides short exposure to the index and are often called
\"bear\" ETFs; conversely, if $l$ is greater than zero, the ETF provides
long exposure to the index, commonly referred to as \"bull\" ETFs. These
securities are usually implemented by means of a rolling futures
strategy. By rebalancing everyday, the ETFs eliminate the risk of ruin
(in this case, losing more money than the fund\'s total value) and
obviate the need for margin payments.

In this piece, we will focus on the properties of leveraged bull ETFs,
common misconceptions, and their role in an investors\' toolkit.

The Popular Argument Against Leverage
-------------------------------------

At face value, a retail investor might assume that if the S&P 500
returned 10% in a year, a 3x leveraged ETF would return 30%. Fortunately
or unfortunately depending on your perspective, this is not the case as
the ETF seeks to attain a 3x multiple on the daily return of the S&P 500
instead of the annualized return. As touched on in the previous section,
by rebalancing daily the ETF can easily handle the inflows and outflows
of the fund while also eliminating the need for capital to be held in
margin. This strategy also greatly reduces the risk of ruin as the S&P
500 would need to lose at least 1/3 of it\'s total value in a single day
for the fund to be wiped out. Though certainly imaginable, this event is
unlikely as the biggest single day loss in the history of the S&P 500
was Black Monday in 1987, in which over 20% of value evaporated in a
single day.

The common wisdom about leveraged ETFs is that they don\'t so much fill
a roll as an investment vehicle, but merely as a day-trading instrument
that allows a trader to easily obtain short-term tactical Beta exposure
to the market in an efficient and simple fashion. In numerous articles
scattered across the internet, the author always drives home the point
again and again that leveraged ETFs are ill-suited to long-term
buy-and-hold investing and should only be purchased by those who are
savvy enough to lay on short-term trades. Instead of cementing this
advice on a solid mathematical foundation, the author usually cherry
picks some example time window for the S&P 500 of around two months
where the market is mostly sideways and volatility is high. He then
points out the prescient point that the levered fund made less or even
lost money whilst the regular fund came out ahead. The conclusion to be
drawn from this I suppose is that levered funds are deceptive, don\'t
actually multiply your returns by the amount claimed, and are a bad
investment. In the next section, we will discuss the mathematical
foundation of this claim and reason about it\'s validity.

A Little Bit of Math
--------------------

We can see the immediate effect of volatility from a simple example.
What happens to a \$100 portfolio that gains and then loses 10% of value
versus a portfolio that gains and then losses 50%

$$\$100(1.10)(0.90) = \$99$$

$$\$100(1.50)(0.50) = \$75$$

As we can see, the difference between the arithmetic sum (which for both
examples was 0) and the geometric sum appropriate for compounded returns
can be quite significant. In order to calculate the affect that
volatility has on a portfolio we can us the volatility tax formula:

$$r_a = r_p - \frac{\sigma^2_p}{2}$$

Where $\sigma$ is the standard deviation of the portfolio, $r_p$ the
return of the portfolio and $r_a$ the actualized return of the portfolio
after deducting for volatility.

It\'s important to understand that the value of the volatility tax
equation is when we are changing the volatility of a known return
stream. If we are using past realized returns to predict future returns,
the volatility equation isn\'t appropriate, since the past returns are
already reflective of the post-tax return. Where the volatility tax
equation does come become useful if we are asking ourselves about the
returns of a levered portfolio in terms of the unlevered returns and
volatility. Alternatively, the equation also comes in handy if we would
like to answer questions as \"If we reduced the volatility our of
current portfolio by 25%, how would that affect the mean return?\"

We need to rewrite the volatility tax equation in terms of leverage.
Assuming normality, we see that rescaling a normal distribution by a
constant affects the mean linearly and the variance non-linearly (thus
affecting the standard deviation linearly):

$$ Y = aX \sim N(a\mu, a^2\sigma^2)$$

In other words, a 2x levered portfolio with a mean return of 5% and a
volatility of 5% is the same as an unlevered fund with a mean return of
10% and a volatility of 10%. As such we can rewrite $r_p$ in terms of
$r_b$ (the base unlevered return of the portfolio) and the leverage
amount ($l$):

$$r_p = r_bl$$

Using the definition of the Sharpe ratio as:

$$S = \frac{r_p - r_f}{\sigma_p} $$

We can rewrite the portfolio volatility in terms of the returns of the
portfolio and the risk-free rate:

$$\sigma_p = \frac{r_p - r_f}{S} = \frac{r_bl - r_f}{S}$$

Substituting into the volatility tax equation we have:

$$r_a = r_bl - \frac{1}{2S^2}(r_b^2l^2 - 2r_br_fl + r_f^2)$$

We then take the derivative in terms of the leverage ratio and set to
zero and solve:

$$ \frac{\text{d}(r_a)}{\text{d}l} = r_b - \frac{r^2_b}{S^2}l + \frac{r_br_f}{S^2} = 0$$

$$ \frac{r^2_b}{S^2}l = r_b + \frac{r_br_f}{S^2}$$

$$l = \frac{1}{r_b}S^2 + \frac{r_f}{r_b}$$

Note that $S$ is our original Sharpe ratio, due to the volatility tax,
our Sharpe linearly degrades. Our adjusted Sharpe is:

$$S_a = \frac{r_b}{\sigma_b} - \frac{1}{2\sigma_b}l$$

We can see that returns form a concave quadratic while the Sharpe ratio
decreases linearly:

![Returns vs Sharpe](/assets/rvs.svg)
