---
author:
- Sturm Mabie
category: Posts
date: '2020-09-02'
mathjax: true
startup: showeverything
title: 'Forecasting Market Kurtosis with the Volatility Smile (Poorly)'
---

Note: I want to thank Algoseek for providing historical SPY option-chain
data at a very reasonable price. Algoseek provides all the market data
you could possibly need, including equity, future, option, forex, crypto
data, and more! If you\'re interested in high quality market data at low
quality prices, check them out [here](https://www.algoseek.com/)!

Before the Black Monday market crash of 1987, options of different
strike prices for the same expiration had roughly the same implied
volatility (IV), inline with the popular Black-Scholes model. After the
crash however, sellers of options realized that perhaps they were taking
on too much long-tail risk since the underlying equities exhibit excess
kurtosis compared to a normal distribution -- one of the assumptions of
Black-Scholes. Sellers proceeded to start charging a premium for options
that were either far in-the-money (ITM) or out-of-the-money (OTM).
Let\'s look at different SPY calls on 2020-05-01 all expiring on
2020-06-01:

![Volatility Smile](/assets/smile.svg)

While Black-Scholes would suggest a uniform distribution (each option
would have the same IV), it\'s clear from the graph that the far ITM and
OTM options are overpriced with respect to Black-Scholes: this
phenomenon is dubbed the \"[volatility
smile](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volatility_smile).\" But if the
volatility smile is due to excess kurtosis of the underlying, can we
forecast future market kurtosis using the dispersion of option IVs? In
this short post we\'ll look at SPY call options between 2012-01-03 and
2020-07-16 in order to see if a higher standard deviation of option IVs
is a predictor of SPY excess kurtosis.

Methodology
-----------

The methodology is simple, we will look at a simple linear regression
between the standard deviation of calls with the same maturity date and
the excess kurtosis of SPY between the current date and the maturity
date:

$$ \text{Kurt}[r_{SPY}] \sim \sigma_{IV}$$

We will restrict the data set to only calls that expire before today\'s
date so that the kurtosis of the market between the date of the option
and maturity can be fully quantified. If the IVs of each option at each
strike is the same in accordance to Black-Scholes, the standard
deviation will be zero; if the market returns fit a log-normal
distribution, the excess kurtosis will be zero as well. Let\'s look at
the output of the linear regression:

![Linear Regression](/assets/linreg.png)

Not a particularly great fit, but it does seem like there\'s a positive
correlation between the standard deviation of IVs and the future market
kurtosis. In addition, the R-squared is 4.12%, which means that the
linear model predicts only 4.12% of the future kurtosis of the market.
Even so, the model does explain some of the future kurtosis of the
market and the coefficient is positive, meaning that indeed a greater
dispersion of option IVs is positively correlated with future excess
kurtosis.

Conclusion
----------

While not a particularly powerful nor predictive model on its own, this
result does lend some credence to the origin of and reason for the
volatility smile of IVs.

Thanks for reading, hope you liked this short post! Like last time, I
won\'t be sharing the code for this one as the option data isn\'t
publicly available and without the data, the code doesn\'t have much
value. If, however, you are interested in accessing the data, check out
[Algoseek](https://algoseek.com) for all of your option data needs (and
more!).
