---
author:
- Sturm Mabie
category: Posts
date: '2020-06-09'
mathjax: true
startup: showeverything
title: 'ETFs, Volatility and Leverage: Towards a New Leveraged ETF Part 3'
---

In the final installment of this three part series, we are going to use
our results from the previous two posts to construct a fully automated
variable leverage ETF. In [part
one](https://cryptm.org/posts/2019/10/04/vol.html), we derived the
optimal leverage ratio for maximizing returns and in [part
two](https://cryptm.org/posts/2020/05/28/vol2.html) we applied the ARMA
and GARCH models to forecast returns and volatility, respectively.

The ETF we are going to build will take variable leverage with a minimum
leverage of 1 and a maximum leverage of 3. This means that the leverage
ratio we will be assuming will deviate considerably from what is
optimal. The reason for this is twofold: 1) many investors don\'t want
to short the market, regardless of what our model says, preferring a
baseline of pure beta exposure, and 2) the SEC rejected an application
for the creation of a 4x S&P 500 ETF, so it would be unlikely that a
higher leverage ratio could be assumed, at least in an ETF wrapper. If
one was instead obtaining leverage directly through futures, -20x to 20x
leverage could be taken.

Right now, we have two components, $\text{E}(r_m)$, the expected monthly
return generated from our ARMA model, and $\text{E}(\sigma_d)$, the
expected daily volatility from our GARCH model. First off, we need to
forward fill our monthly return data, in order to generate return data
for everyday. We forward fill instead of back fill in order to avoid
lookahead bias. Also, because our ARMA model is forecasted the future
one month expected return, we convert our daily volatility into monthly
variance: $21\text{E}(\sigma_d)^2$. So our raw leverage ratio becomes:

$$l = \frac{\text{E}(r_m^{\text{fill}})}{21\text{E}(\sigma_d)^2}$$

Let\'s look at graph of our leverage ratio over time to get a sense of
what we\'re dealing with:

![Optimal leverage](/assets/olev.png)

Oof, most investors won\'t be happy with that! Not only is our optimal
leverage calculation taking huge short and long positions, but it\'s
changing the direction of the portfolio very frequently. We want to
smooth out the changes in leverage as well as constrain the amount taken
between 1 and 3. In order to do this, we apply the following
transformations on the time-series:

1.  First, if the leverage ratio is less than 1 at a time-point, we set
    it to 0.

2.  In order to constrain the values, we then add $e$ and logscale it.
    This should give us values approximately between 1 and 3.

3.  To smooth the leverage, we apply an [exponential rolling
    window](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/user_guide/computation.html#exponentially-weighted-windows),
    with an $\alpha$ of 0.05.

4.  If any values are above 3, we set them to 3.

Below is the full transformation:

$$f(x) =\begin{cases}
x &\text{if }x > 1\\
0 &\text{else}\\
\end{cases}
$$

$$\sum_{t=1}^n \min(\text{EWM}_{\alpha=0.05}[\log(f(x_t)+e)],\,3)$$

Consider the graph of adjusted leverage:

![Adjusted leverage](/assets/alev.png)

Though we\'re significantly deviated from what the optimal leverage is,
our adjusted leverage looks a lot more reasonable. The transitions are
smoother and the values are bounded between 1 and 3, as desired. Now we
simply multiple the leverage ratio by the returns of the S&P 500 and we
have our strategy! This is the moment of truth, let\'s look at a graph
of the returns of the S&P 500, the returns of our ETF, and the leverage
ratio:

![variable leverage S&P 500 vs S&P 500 vs leverage
ratio](/assets/etf.png)

Not bad! Our ETF is behaving as expected: taking on more and more
leverage during bull runs and reducing exposure when the market drops.
The leverage ratio fluctuates between 1 and 2 due to our smoothing
factor, though more risk could be taken by choosing a greater $\alpha$
value.

Conclusion
----------

At long last, we\'ve reached the end of this series. We\'ve talked about
investors, mostly irrational, aversion to holding leveraged ETFs over a
long period of time, derived the optimal leverage ratio to maximize
returns, created models to forecast returns and volatility, and used all
of this to create a variable leverage ETF. Could such a product be
brought to market, and would investors be interested? Can investors be
convinced to hold any product that isn\'t just vanilla beta? I\'m not
sure, but it is certainly an interesting opportunity. No product on the
market fulfills this niche, if there is even one to exploit. I hope you
enjoyed this series as much as I enjoyed researching and writing it.
Though we did succeed in creating a rudimentary model, so much more work
could be done on it. I believe that a variable leverage product could
have great potential in the retail space, especially now that vanilla
beta has been completely commoditized. New ETF ideas that are \"beta
plus\" not only have the potential to deliver value to investors, but
also could command much higher fees.
