---
author:
- smabie
category: Posts
date: '2020-05-13'
mathjax: false
startup: showeverything
title: 'Prediction Markets: Strategies for Alpha Generation'
---

Much like financial markets, prediction markets (PM) have existed in
some informal capacity for hundreds of years; the earliest known
records, dating back to 1503, describe the practice of betting upon
papal succession. Much like traditional financial markets, the process
of centralization took many hundreds of years, as the value of
centralized exchanges slowly began to impress itself upon the
participants. The start of the contemporary era of PM and political
betting, perhaps the foremost type of PM, was heralded by the *Iowa
Electronic Markets*, established during the 1988 presidential election
by the University of Iowa. Since then, many sites and markets have come
and gone in the relatively unregulated and nascent field. Currently,
[PredictIt](https://predictit.org), run by the *Victoria University of
Wellington*, dominates the space in both trade volume and number of
independent markets. Other markets include *Betfair* and *Augur*.

In this post we will give an overview of how PredictIt markets are
structured and a non-exhaustive list of commonly used strategies for
alpha generation in order to give the reader a better understanding of
how these markets work and how to potentially profit from them.

Overview of PredictIt
---------------------

The basic building block of PredictIt is a market, with each market
containing at least two brackets and an expiration; where each bracket
represents a distinct outcome and the expiration setting the date of
when the owners of shares are paid out and the market settled. For each
bracket, traders can buy or sell only two types of shares: *yes* shares
or *no* shares. By purchasing a *yes* share, the buyer is acquiring the
right to be paid \$1 if the event happens; conversely, a *no* share
gives the buyer the right to be paid \$1 if the event does not occur.
For every bracket, two distinct order books are used: one for the *yes*
shares and one for the *no* shares. When placing the order, only one
order type can be used, akin to a *limit* order in financial markets
that is good until cancelled or the market expires. Traders can either
wait for their contract to expire or list it on the order book for any
price between 1 and 99 cents, exclusive. If a contract expires or is
executed on the order book for a profit, a 10% tax is taken by PredictIt
in order to fund the site\'s operations. When buying into or selling out
of multiple brackets that are not mutally exclusive with each other, the
trader\'s total exposure to the market is taken into account and their
cash balance is credited or debited appropriately. This is often
surprising for new PredictIt traders, as it is possible to actually
receive money for the purchase of new shares (and conversely, to pay
money when selling shares); this usually happens when *no* shares are
bought on subsequent brackets in the same market as the trader\'s total
market exposure is often reduced the more *no* shares are bought across
different brackets in the same markets (click HERE for more information
about the rules). Take the example market described in the table below:

| Bracket | Best No Ask |
|---------|-------------|
| A       | 50¢         |
| B       | 50¢         |

When the trader buys one *no* of bracket *A*, she will be debited 50¢,
as that is her total exposure to the market: she cannot lose any more
than that. If she then buys one *no* on *B*, her account will be
credited 50¢ on execution as she has zeroed out her exposure to the
market, since in both outcomes she will make \$1, cancelling out the
combined value of both contracts. In practice, the math is slightly more
complicated as PredictIt accounts for the 10% tax in these credit and
debit calculations.

Savvy traders can use this mechanism to build up very large positions
with little capital and in certain cases, actually realize cash profits
when the shares are bought. Consider the following market:

| Bracket | Best No Ask |
|---------|-------------|
| A       | 1¢          |
| B       | 1¢          |

As before, the trader when buying one *no* of *A* will pay the full cost
of the contract, which in this case is 1¢. The interesting part comes
when the trader purchases the second contract: she will immediately get
credited 99¢ (for a profit of 98¢) and her exposure will, as before, be
zeroed out. Of course, this isn\'t a very realistic example as the
efficient market sharks will quickly devour all the chum in the water
and move the prices until the sum of the *no* ask prices is equal to or
greater than \$1.

Index of Strategies
-------------------

Below is the list of strategies we will discuss, ordered from low risk
to high risk:

1.  Bracket Arbitrage
2.  Yes/No Arbitrage
3.  Information Arbitrage
4.  Carry
5.  Rule Arbitrage
6.  Statistical Arbitrage
7.  Momentum
8.  Mean-Reversion
9.  Expert Knowledge

The next sections will describe each strategy in detail, explain the
conceptual background, and advise you on how and when to apply each in
the markets.

Bracket Arbitrage
-----------------

Perhaps the most straightforward and least risky strategy is bracket
arbitrage, which we discussed brefily above. Simple bracket arbitrage
means buying an equal number shares in all brackets if the sum of all
prices is below some amount. For *yes* shares, this amount is \$1, as
the sum of the probabilities of all events for well-formed probability
mass function (PMF) must equal 1. Therefore, if the sum of all *yes*
prices is less than one, we can make a completely risk-free profit,
provided that we are able to find the opportunity in the first place.
Also note that theoretically we could short the share if the sum is
greater than one and also make a risk-free profit but unfortunately
PredictIt does not allow the shorting of shares. For clarity, consider
the following market:

| Bracket | Yes Ask |
|---------|---------|
| A       | 52¢     |
| B       | 17¢     |
| C       | 29¢     |

Since the sum of all brackets is less than \$1 (98¢), we can buy an
equal amount of shares of each bracket and realize a \~2% return
(pre-tax).

The same general idea works for the *no* side of the market as well,
except that the sum of the shares must equal the number of brackets (in
dollars) minus \$1. For example:

| Bracket | No Ask |
|---------|--------|
| A       | 98¢    |
| B       | 70¢    |
| C       | 29¢    |

For no arbitrage to be possible, the sum of the *no* prices must add up
to \$2 (instead they add up to \$1.97), allowing us to buy an equal
amount of each bracket and net a \~1.5% return.

While bracket arbitrage is a risk-free strategy, finding opportunities
to exploit is exceedingly difficult. In fact, it\'s possible that
you\'ll never find such an opportunity by just perusing different
markets manually. Instead, one should use PredictIt\'s market data API
(described HERE) to receive automated alerts on arbitrage opportunities.
Alternatively, one could write a fully automated bot to exploit these
inefficiencies; take caution though, as this is both difficult to do and
against PredictIt\'s TOS.

A slightly riskier version of arbitrage involves excluding outcomes that
are clearly foreclosed before performing the summation. This strategy
involves some judgement sense but can be profitable. Arbitrage
opportunities that span all outcomes are easier to recognize
mathematically, and so they are usually fixed quickly. Bracket exclusion
is sometimes quite recognizable and can net triple the profits with
little additional risk. For example, take this market from March 7,
2020, \"Who will be the Democratic Nominee for President?\"

| Bracket | Yes Ask |
|---------|---------|
| Biden   | 84¢     |
| Sanders | 11¢     |
| Clinton | 5¢      |

At a glance, there is no arbitrage opportunity here, as the brackets sum
to 1. Clearly Hilllary Clinton is not a candidate in the 2020 primary,
and it is impossible for her to enter the race at this point. Filing
deadlines for all states have closed. Theoretically, the democrats could
settle on her after a contested convention but any casual observer would
agree the probability of this outcome is essentially 0. A good rule of
thumb is that if any bracket has a last transaction price is 99 cents or
1 cent and no offers available on the corresponding side of the order
book, it is safe to count it as \$1 or 0 for the purposes of bracket
arbitrage. In the case of the market above, the unusual price of 5 cents
for Hillary Clinton is probably related to liquidity issues, as holders
of no shares created months ago struggle to get their money out at 96
cents in order to reinvest it elsewhere for better returns before the
market resolves. Mispricings for nearly certain outcomes like this are
common when expiration dates are far in the future or rules of
resolution are unclear. Traders prefer not to be exposed to the time and
risk, so they accept unfair prices to convert their investments back
into (liquid) cash.

Yes/No Arbitrage
----------------

Despite my inability to come up with a better name, yes/no arbitrage is
a reasonable way to make risk-free profits on PredictIt. Implementing
this strategy requires multiple accounts which represents the only risk
associated with it: only one account per individual is allowed as per
PredictIt\'s TOS so successfully using this strategy could lead to the
banning of your account. Fortunately, if PredictIt decides to ban your
account, they will first liquidate all of your positions and then wire
the total balance to an account of your choosing. Instead of arbitraging
between multiple brackets of the same type (*yes* or *no*) as with
bracket arbitrage, we arbitrage between the *yes* and *no* side for each
bracket. If the sum of the *yes* and *no* ask is less than \$1, we can
take advantage of the opportunity by purchasing an equal number of each
kind of share. For example, consider the following market:

| Bracket | Yes Ask | No Ask |
|---------|---------|--------|
| A       | 63¢     | 40¢    |
| B       | 32¢     | 64¢    |

We are unable to take advantage of the mispricing of bracket *A* (since
we are unable to short shares), but we can purchase both sides for *B*
and make a risk-free profit. In this case, we purchase one share of each
for a total cost of 96¢ and receive a profit of 4¢, thus netting a
pre-tax return of \~4.1%. Note that the reason this strategy requires
multiple accounts is that PredictIt does not allow traders to buy both
*yes* and *no* shares on the same bracket under a single account, one
kind of shares must be sold prior to the purchase of the other.

Opportunities for this strategy are easier to find than for bracket
arbitrage since it necessitates multiple accounts, but even so,
automated and constant monitoring of the market data feed is necessary
to reliably find the mispricing. Caution is needed because of the TOS
and as such, it\'s advisable to create a pair of accounts purely for
this strategy in order to minimize the downside if the accounts are
frozen.

Information Arbitrage
---------------------

Information arbitrage is the bread and butter of many PredictIt traders
and perhaps the most commonly used strategy on the site. The mechanics
are straightforward but the amount of work and time required can be
prohibitive: simply read and trade on new information faster than anyone
else. Personally I find this strategy to be time-consuming and boring,
but for those who are either are already reading the news or diligant
about monitoring settlement sources, this strategy can be incredibly
profitable. Beware though that since most markets incorporate new
information reasonably quickly (under 30 minutes), it\'s necessary to
react fast, preferably under 5 minutes.

Carry
-----

Another classic and popular PredictIt strategy, exploiting a positive
carry is an ideal way to earn a return on capital while waiting for new
intermittant opportunities. The basic idea is to buy shares (either
*yes*\'s or *no*\'s) in markets and brackets that have a positive carry.
For those unfamiliar with the concept, this means that whatever you\'re
buying becomes more valuable over time, thus allowing you to hold it and
make a profit day after day. In the context of PredictIt, this usually
manifests in one of two ways:

1.  The market expires at a certain date and the event that you are
    buying shares of has not yet occured. The trader then buys whichever
    bracket and type of share that represents the status quo. If the
    status quo is not disrupted, the time decay of the non-status quo
    bracket or share will push up the price of the status uo bracket or
    share. An example might be: \"Will John Smith run for office before
    the end of 2020.\" By purchasing *no* shares the trader is betting
    on the status quo and the price will rise consistently until
    expiration, assuming John Smith does not, in fact, ever run for
    office. Of course, the risk associated with this trade is that John
    Smith may run for office before 2020; even so, it\'s possible to use
    this strategy in combination with information arbitrage to make
    money on the carry and quickly get out (or switch the trade to the
    other side) before much profit is lost.
2.  The event has already occured and the price has risen, usually to
    99¢. Many traders sell contracts at 99¢ before settlement in order
    to deploy the capital to other opportunities that have a higher
    expected value. By buying these shares, a trader can net a risk=free
    1% return over the remaining duration. Note that even when a share
    is priced at 99¢ it does not necessarily mean the event has already
    occured, reading the actual settlement rules of the market is
    critical in order to make well informed trades.

An important criteria for identifying opportunities is the ratio between
the total potential profit and the expiration date of the contract: a
99¢ share on a market that expires in one month is significantly more
valuable than one that expires in a year.

Mispricings can sometimes occur because only one market exists to
speculate on a particular eventuality, but the deadline for resolution
is approaching. When new information emerges making such an eventuality
more likely, buyers look for a way to act on the information and the
prices move dramatically. However they may fail to notice that the
resolution date is too soon. For example the market \"Will the World
Health Organization Declare Coronavirus a Pandemic by March 6 2020?\"
moved dramatically in early March as more cases were reported. However
by March 3, each passing day had such a high carry that the news was
irrelevant.

Rule Arbitrage
--------------

Though not something that a trader can reliably exploit, the potential
windfalls from this strategy can be absolutely massive. By reading the
settlement rules for each market *very* carefully, a trader can profit
off of those who have not (the majority). I\'ve seen cases where a
contract is priced at 97¢ after an event happens that most traders think
qualifies as a *yes* but actually, according to a close reading of the
settlement rules, is a *no*. These events are rare, but a 10-50x profit
is not out of the question. Beware though, in many markets the
setttlement rules stipulate that PredictIt has discretion to decide the
outcome in certain situations, usually pertaining to the unavailability
of settlement sources (if the settlement website goes down, for
example).

Statistical Arbitrage
---------------------

Statistical arbitrage in the context of prediction markets is a type of
strategy that aims to profit off of price deviations relative to some
reference model. Instead of developing their own models, a time
consuming and difficult task, many traders arbitrage prices with
publically posted predictions, such as those on Nate Silver\'s
[538](https://fivethirtyeight.com/), a political forecasting website.
While small profits can be made consistently using public predictions, a
proprietary model can be much more profitable.

Momentum
--------

As with financial markets, momentum trading simply involves trading on a
trend with the hope that the trend continues. This strategy carries the
risk of the trend ending, but can often be used as a proxy for an
information arbitrage strategy. A common way for traders to generate a
monetum signal is for them to buy a single share in all interested
markets and put a sell order at a pre-determined price, maybe 5-10%
greater than the current price. When the trade executes, the trader
receives a notification which signals that there has been a significant
price move. The trader can now manually place a bigger order and hope
for the trend to continue.

Mean-Reversion
--------------

The opposite of momentum, the mean-reversion strategy involves betting
on the reversion of price. It\'s common for traders to overbuy or
oversell on new information, allowing mean-reversion traders to buy up
the relatively cheap shares and profit after sentiment becomes more
measured.

Expert Knowledge
----------------

As in much of our politics nowadays, traders sometimes seem to use
PredictIt less as a way to make money and more as a way to express their
identity/personal beliefs. This might be analogous to the way wishful
thinking can create unreasonable odds of a famous horse or a well-loved
home team. Readers will not be surprised to learn that these fan-boy
traders tend to skew left, with a few exceptions.

Inside information can be recognized from drastic and unexplained price
swings. It is very risky and difficult to make money by joining these
careening bandwagons, but dramatic price moves should be a reason to
consider downsizing bets you already have open in such markets.

Identifying these irrational prices is hard to quantify, but intuition
and common sense can help to identify these opportunities.

Conclusion
----------

Hopefully this post has gotten you thinking about the standard
strategies in use and how and when to apply them. The best trading
results often occur when multiple signals or strategies are used to
together to inform the buying or selling of shares. Good luck and hang
in there! Prediction markets are often frustrating, but can be quite
profitable and satisfying given a certain level of dedication!
