---
author:
- Sturm Mabie
category: Posts
date: '2020-05-18'
mathjax: true
startup: showeverything
title: One Weird Trick to Profit off of a Global Market Meltdown
---

Did you know there\'s one weird trick that Wall Street doesn\'t want you
to know? For only one payment of \$39.99, you can get access to this
limited time only exclusive video that will show you how to fight that
bear market! Click here before Wall Street makes it illegal... Or you
could just read this post, I guess.

Anyways, will analyzing some backtesting data I came across an
interesting and surprisingly simple strategy that has performed very
well during coronavirus period. Simply put, most of the volatility
during this period has occured overnight, that is, between market close
and the opening auction the next day. This volatility has primarily been
negative, with large downward price differences between the closing
price and the opening price the next day. The intraday market on the
otherhand has mostly stayed flat or gone up modestly. Let\'s take a look
at three different portfolios: one where we just hold the S&P 500, the
other where we buy the S&P 500 at market open and sell at market close,
and a third where we do the same but also short the S&P 500 between the
close and market open:

![](file:///assets/owtr.png)

We see that before coronavirus significantly impacted the market, the
returns of all three strategies were relatively similar: little
dispersion was observed in the overnight market and large moves were
primarily contained to the regular intraday session. Around the end of
February, things began to change: global coronavirus news began to
dramatically increase the difference between the closing and opening
prices. By executing a strategy as simple as only holding the index
intraday, we\'ve converted a 10% loss into a 10% profit, a pretty
incredible difference. Taken one step further, we can short the
overnight market and net an eye-popping 25% gain over this five and a
half month period!

While the mechanisms for this trend aren\'t entirely clear, I suspect
this pattern occurs when global markets start to exhibit a very high
correlation to each other. Since coronavirus is a global problem, most
markets across the world are being affected by the same fundamental
factors. Because of this, the price difference between the close and
open in the US has been a reflection of moves in the European and Asian
markets: when the foreign markets crash, it\'s highly likely that the
American market will open down in the morning. If, on the otherhand,
coronavirus caused a local recession (imagine if coronavirus was only a
US phenomenon), I suspect that we wouldn\'t see the same overnight
high-volatility trend.

Now, let\'s look at the previous global recession, here\'s the same
graph as before but between 2007-06-1 and 2009-06-01:

![](file:///assets/owtr2.png)

We observe the exact same phenomenon, with large moves in the overnight
markets. Even so, much more volatilty was present in the intraday
markets than now: even when using the long intraday, short overnight
strategy we would have still ended up down about 10% over the two year
period.

Finally, for comparison, the same strategies during the raging bull
market between 2016-01-01 and 2018-01-01:

![](file:///assets/owtr3.png)

Unsurprisingly, both the long intraday and long intraday, short
overnight strategies leave money on the table compared to the vanilla
portfolio. Even so, both net a not unsubstantial return during this two
year period: long intraday of around 23% and the long intraday, short
overnight of around 8%.

Conclusion
----------

One last thing to keep in mind is that even with zero comissions, the
act of buying after the open and selling before the close incurs
moderate trading costs: even assuming you\'re buying large cap stocks
with low spreads (let\'s assume around 4 bips or 0.04%), the annualized
cost comes to around 10%.

Even so, shorting or zeroing out overnight exposure can be a powerful
tactic during tumulteous markets: especially if markets around the world
are moving in lockstep. Additionally, you can lend the money overnight,
netting a little extra money (though it doesn\'t help that interest
rates are lowered close to zero during these time periods).

I hope you enjoyed this post! If you want to check out the Quantopian
notebook used to generate the above graphs, click
[here](https://www.quantopian.com/posts/coronavirus-intraday). Feel free
to play around with the dates, though unfortunately, data isn\'t
available before 2002.
