---
author:
- Sturm Mabie
category: Posts
date: '2020-07-09'
mathjax: true
startup: showeverything
title: The Value of Alternative Investments
---

A retail investor would be forgiven for assuming that there are really
only two assets classes one should consider for personal investments:
equities (stocks) and fixed income (bonds). Wherever you look, these two
asset classes dominate the financial landscape. All robo-advisors and
most personal advisors implement a mix of bonds and equities for the
portfolios of their clients. The idea behind this mix is simple: bonds
are low risk and will earn you a marginal return, while equities are
riskier and will be the real engine of returns in good times. In bad
times, bonds will rise, mitigating some of the losses of your equity
portfolio: it\'s been long known and accepted that stocks and bonds have
a negative correlation. Tying this strategy together is periodic
rebalancing, taking money off the table during bull markets (and moving
them to the safer bonds), and deploying money to the equity portion
during bear markets. This in effect overlays a mean-reversion strategy
onto the portfolio, boosting the returns of an otherwise static
portfolio. The archetypal allocation is 60% equities, and 40% bonds,
though each investor\'s allocation is going to differ based on his risk
tolerance, age, and personal goals.

Though there\'s nothing wrong with this two asset class mix, the
historically negative correlation between stocks and bonds means that in
most market environments, bonds are going to drag down the portfolio.
Ideally, we would want to mix in uncorrelated assets and investments
instead of negatively correlated ones, in order to reduce the volatility
of our portfolio without dragging down our returns. Alternative
investments such as hedge funds, venture capital, metals, or real estate
all serve this purpose. These alternative investments are not only
popular for their occasionally spectacular returns, but also for their
low correlation to the broader equity market. For this post, we\'ll use
the oldest and possibly most maligned investment, gold, and explore ways
to mix it into a pure equity, S&P 500 portfolio.

Gold
----

Gold and other metals are an interesting and, unfortunately,
underappreciated asset class. The much derided \"gold-bug\" is made out
to be paranoid, crazy, and irrational. Despite being so rare and
valuable, the percentage of the world\'s gold supply that is used for
industrial uses is comparatively small, creating a phenomenon that
untethers the price of gold from other asset classes. Let\'s look at the
returns of gold versus the S&P 500 between 2010-01-01 and 2020-07-08:

![S&P 500 vs Gold](/assets/gold.png)

It\'s evident that the returns of gold are unspectacular, to say the
least. It doesn\'t seem to consistently lose or gain value as much as it
meanders around, seemingly uncorrelated to the S&P 500. And indeed, it
is almost entirely uncorrelated, with a correlation to the S&P 500 of
only 1% over this time period. Is it even worth including in our
portfolio? And if it is, how would we determine the allocation size?

Monte-Carlo
-----------

To clarify, we\'re trying to determine the weights for the S&P 500 and
gold parts of our portfolio, taking on no leverage:

$$|x_a| + |x_b| = 1$$

And maximizing the risk-adjusted return. For every unit of risk we take,
we would like to maximize the amount of return we receive. We\'ll first
start off by doing the most straightforward thing, and randomly choosing
different weights for our two asset portfolio and then graphing them:

![Return vs Volatility](/assets/ef.png)

This hyperbola formed is called the *Markowitz Bullet*, after Harry
Markowitz, winner of the Nobel Prize for Economics for his work on
*Modern Portfolio Theory*. The portfolio with the best return vs
volatility profile is called the *frontier* or *efficient* portfolio.
There exists only one such portfolio and it is the portfolio every
rational investor should prefer, ignoring borrowings costs and
[volatility drag](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volatility_tax) (for
more information about volatility drag, check out my other post
[here](https://cryptm.org/posts/2019/11/28/div.html), or the beginning
of my three part series
[here](https://cryptm.org/posts/2019/10/04/vol.html)).

While it\'s relatively easy to find what would have been the frontier
portfolio looking backwards, it is much more difficult to estimate the
frontier portfolio over some future time period. We can forecast and
then reduce future volatility with modest accuracy, but forecasting
expected return is a notoriously difficult problem. So difficult, in
fact, that few quantitative investors even try, instead resigning
themselves to solely minimize volatility. Likewise, we\'ll resign
ourselves to the same fate.

In the general case of a many asset portfolio, no closed form solution
can be found for the minimization of volatility, we must instead use an
optimizer or do a Monte-Carlo simulation; but in the two asset case, we
can find a symbolic solution. So that\'s what we\'ll do next!

Symbolic Solution
-----------------

Recall that our portfolio return is going to be a function of our two
assets and their weights:

$$ P = x_a X_a+ x_b X_b$$

Likewise, our expected portfolio mean would look like:

$$\begin{align}
   E[P] &= \mu_P\\
   &= x_a E[X_a] + x_b E[X_b]\\
   &= x_a \mu_a + x_b \mu_b\\
   \end{align}$$

And the equation for variance:

$$\text{Var}[X] = \sigma^2 = E[(X-\mu)^2]$$

Covariance is similar, except instead of squaring, we multiply each
variable after demeaning:

$$\text{Cov}[X,Y] = E[(X-\mu_X)(Y-\mu_Y)]$$

Now we just need to derive the portfolio variance:

$$\text{Var}[P] = \text{Var}[x_aX_a + x_b X_b]$$

First we substitute for variance and rearrange:

$$\begin{align}
   \text{Var}[x_aX_a + x_b X_b] =& E[(x_aX_a + x_b X_b - E[x_a X_a + x_b X_b])^2]\\
   =& E[(x_a X_a - E[x_a X_a] + x_b X_b - E[x_b X_b])^2]
   \end{align}$$

Now we can pull the constants out of the expectations, substitute, and
expand:

$$\begin{align}
   \text{Var}[x_a X_a + x_b X_b] =& E[(x_a (X_a - \mu_a) + x_b (X_b - \mu_b))^2] \\
   =& E[x_a^2(X_a - \mu_a)^2 + x_b^2(X_b - \mu_b)^2 + 2 x_a x_b (X_a - \mu_a)(X_b - \mu_b)]
   \end{align}$$

Finally, we break up the expectations, and replace:

$$\begin{align}
   \text{Var}[x_a X_a + x_b X_b] =& x^2_a E[(X_a - \mu_a)^2] + x^2_b E[X_b - \mu_b] + 2x_a x_b E[(X_a-\mu_a)(X_b-\mu_b)]\\
   =& x^2_a \sigma_a^2 + x^2_b \sigma_b^2 + 2 x_a x_b \text{Cov}[X_a,X_b]\\
   =& x^2_a \sigma_a^2 + x^2_b \sigma_b^2 + 2 x_a x_b \rho_{ab} \sigma_a \sigma_b
   \end{align}$$

Where $\rho_{ab}$ is the correlation between $X_a$ and $X_b$:

$$\rho_{ab} = \frac{\text{Cov}[X_a,X_b]}{\sigma_a\sigma_b}$$

Now that we have an equation for variance in terms of the weights, mean,
volatility, and correlation between the two assets, we can formulate our
objective:

$$\min\left( \text{Var}[x_aX_a + x_b X_b]\right)$$

Where:

$$x_a + x_b = 1$$

We perform the substitution $x_b = 1 - x_a$ and then take the derivative
with respect to $x_a$:

$$\frac{\mathrm{d} \sigma_P}{\mathrm{d}x_a}=2 \, \rho_{\mathit{ab}} \sigma_{a} \sigma_{b} - 2 \, \sigma_{b}^{2} - 2 \, {\left(2 \, \rho_{\mathit{ab}} \sigma_{a} \sigma_{b} - \sigma_{a}^{2} - \sigma_{b}^{2}\right)} x_{a}$$

Now we set to 0 and solve for $x_a$:

$$x_{a} = \frac{\rho_{\mathit{ab}} \sigma_{a} \sigma_{b} - \sigma_{b}^{2}}{2 \, \rho_{\mathit{ab}} \sigma_{a} \sigma_{b} - \sigma_{a}^{2} - \sigma_{b}^{2}}$$

And $x_b$:

$$x_b = 1 - x_a$$

Note that sometimes this equation will give us values for $x_a$ and
$x_b$ that imply leverage, i.e:

$$|x_a| + |x_b| > 1 $$

But we can always rescale them by dividing each one by $|x_a| + |x_b|$.
In the next section, we\'ll put this formula to work.

Portfolio Weights
-----------------

We\'re going to use a one year or 252 day rolling window to generate the
weights. Everyday, we slide our window over one and generate the new
weights for that day. Below is the generated graph:

![S&P 500 Weight vs Gold weight](/assets/gw.png)

Well that\'s interesting, the weights change considerably over time. In
a real portfolio, not only would we be using an optimizer and a
multitude of risk factors to determine the weights, but we would also
have constraints on position size, turnover, and the magnitude of
deviation from the \"ideal\" portfolio, and etc. But even in this simple
and contrived example, we see that our formula is doing its job: as the
volatility of the S&P 500 increases, like at the end of 2018 and during
Coronavirus, we start cutting back our equity exposure.

Let\'s now look at the returns of our portfolio compared to both gold
and the S&P 500:

![Portfolio vs S&P 500 vs Gold](/assets/altr.png)

A lot of gains from the market are given up, as we might have expected,
but the return stream becomes a lot less volatile. Just looking at a
graph of cumulative returns isn\'t super informative, so here\'s a table
of various metrics:

| Metric      | Gold  | S&P 500 | Portfolio |
|-------------|-------|---------|-----------|
| Ann. Vol    | 15.8% | 17.4%   | 10.8%     |
| Ann. Ret    | 4.3%  | 12.4%   | 8.4%      |
| Beta        | 0.01  | 1       | 0.41      |
| Ann. Sharpe | 0.27  | 0.71    | 0.77      |

Wow! Our volatility is lower than either gold or the S&P 500 alone, our
beta has been cut more than in half compared to the S&P 500, and our
Sharpe ratio is even higher than both! Even with mixing in an asset that
had poor returns and high volatility, we\'ve managed to construct a
portfolio that, on a risk-adjusted basis, is superior to the S&P 500.
And, if we so desired, could be levered up in order to beat the return
of the S&P 500, while maintaining comparatively low volatility.

Conclusion
----------

Even with a bad Sharpe ratio and less than stellar returns, gold
enhanced our pure equity portfolio. The same also can be said about
other, more popular, alternative investments. Hedge funds specifically
are often derided for their low returns and frequent meltdowns (such as
Long-Term Capital Management); but like with gold, looks can be
deceiving. Returns and volatility aren\'t the whole story. When
designing a portfolio, each individual investment is irrelevant, and
instead the return stream of the portfolio as a whole is what matters.
Considered in isolation, a lot of alternative investments look
sub-optimal and irrational. It is only when you zoom out and think about
the needs of the investor (their existing allocations, investment goals,
monetary needs, etc) does everything come into perspective. When it
comes to investing, the whole is certainly greater than the sum of its
parts!

I hope you liked the post and if you did, let me know! You can also
check out the notebook, developed on Quantopian,
[here](https://www.quantopian.com/posts/the-value-of-alternative-investments).
Possible things you could mess around with are the start and end dates
and the two assets to construct a portfolio from.
