---
author:
- smabie
category: Posts
date: '2020-06-28'
mathjax: true
startup: showeverything
title: The Low Beta Anomaly
---

Perhaps more than any other development, finance was ushered into the
modern era with the development of the *Capital Asset Pricing Model*
(CAPM) by William Sharpe in the early 60s. Though commonly criticized as
too simple and reductionist, the model is still used today as an easy
way to determine a stock\'s exposure to the market:

$$r_i - r_f = r_f + \beta_i (r_m - r_f)$$

$\beta_i$ was originally formulated as
$\frac{\text{Cov}(r_m,r_i)}{\text{Var}(r_m)}$, but it is more commonly
calculated by taking the slope of a linear regression between the asset
and the market. $r_m$ is the expected market return, $r_f$ is the
expected risk-free rate, and $r_i$ is the expected return of the asset.

Perhaps the model is so popular because the interpretation of $\beta$ is
so concrete and easy to understand: a stock\'s $\beta$ is simply a
multiplier on the market\'s return. Stocks with high betas are more
volatile than the market, and those with smaller betas less so. In
tumultuous times, investors try and cut their volatility by rotating
into low beta stocks; while in bull markets, investors clamor to those
with the highest betas.

There\'s been a problem with CAPM, and indeed, the very concept of beta,
for a long time now: it\'s called the low beta anomaly. Academics
noticed that there was systematic discrepancies between high and low
beta stocks: it seemed like higher beta stocks were under performing and
low beta stocks were outperforming. Consider the *Security Market Line*
(SML):

![Security Market Line](/assets/sml.png)

According to CAPM, the returns of low beta stocks were supposed to
linearly scaled by their beta exposure, likewise with higher beta
stocks. Instead, it was noticed that there was an unexpected curve:

![Low beta anomaly](/assets/lba.png)

As we can see, high volatility (and thus, high beta) portfolios are
returning significantly less than what is expected, thus throwing a
wrench into the very concept of beta. After seeing the chart, a natural
question is: can we exploit this mispricing while not being exposed to
the market? In this post, we\'ll look into whether it\'s possible to
profit off of this effect and also discuss the potential structural and
behavioral reasons for this anomaly.

A Simple Approach
-----------------

Of course, the simplest way to try and capture the excess return of the
anomaly is to construct a portfolio of low beta equities and call it a
day. But what if we don\'t want to be exposed to the market, even to the
degree that low beta equities are? Like most answers in finance, the
answer is a market neutral long/short portfolio!

For this strategy, we\'ll be using the Quantopian *Q1500US* universe,
which consists of the 1500 most liquid US equities on any given day. We
then construct our low beta factor as such:

$$f = \text{Z}[\text{rank}(-\beta_{252})]$$

This will give us large positive values for stocks that have low beta,
and small negative values for those that have high beta. Before we rank
and z-score, in order to calculate the beta for each equity, we find the
slope of a simple linear regression over a 252 day rolling window. We
then use these factor values as the weights of our long/short portfolio.
Let\'s look at the total long/short return of our simple strategy
between 2003-01-01 and 2020-01-01:

![Cumulative return](/assets/betacum.png)

Well... this isn\'t good! Why are we losing money? Does this mean that
the low beta anomaly isn\'t actually true? Digging into the numbers a
little more, it turns out that the total portfolio beta for this
strategy is actually negative, -38% to be exact. This means that even
though we are market neutral, we have a negative exposure to the market:
when the market goes up, our portfolio loses money, and vice versa.
Since the market goes up most of the time, this isn\'t a great property
to have. Ideally, we want to have zero beta exposure, not negative
exposure. Let\'s look at the skew of the distribution of betas over
time:

![Skew over time](/assets/skew.png)

In order for our market neutral portfolio to have zero beta, we would
need the skew of the betas to be zero, like for a standard normal
distribution. To make this a little more concrete, let\'s look at a
histogram for a single time period of stock betas:

![Histogram](/assets/hist.png)

Now, the problem becomes evident: even though we are market neutral, we
end up taking on negative beta exposure because the distribution of the
beta of stocks has a long side-side tail. Almost no stocks actually have
negative beta exposure, while many have high beta exposures! This means
that when longing and shorting in equal proportion, we end up with a
large negative beta since our long positions don\'t have a low enough
beta in order to cancel out our high beta short positions.

Fixing the Problem
------------------

So, how do we proceed? We need to find some way to adjust the weights of
our portfolio so that we end up with zero beta exposure. Fortunately,
calculating the beta exposure is relatively straightforward. Given a
column vector of weights:

$$\mathbf{X} = \begin{bmatrix}
   x_1 \\
   x_2 \\
   \vdots \\
   x_n \\
   \end{bmatrix}
   $$

And a vector of beta exposures:

$$\mathbf{B} = \begin{bmatrix}
   \beta_1 & \beta_2 & \dots & \beta_n
   \end{bmatrix}$$

We can easily find the beta of portfolio:

$$\beta_p = \mathbf{BX}$$

Traditionally, we would solve this equation by using an optimizer with a
constraint that $\beta_p =0$. But because we only have one factor, we
can find an analytical solution. What we want to do is to try and solve
for a $\beta_p$ of zero. To do this, we first need to rewrite the
equation in terms of the weights that are positive (the low beta side)
and those that are negative (the high beta side):

$$\mathbf{X_\alpha} = \begin{bmatrix}
   x_1 \\
   x_2 \\
   \vdots \\
   x_j
   \end{bmatrix}$$

$$\mathbf{X_\beta} = \begin{bmatrix}
   x_1 \\
   x_2 \\
   \vdots \\
   x_k
   \end{bmatrix}$$

Likewise, we split up the betas as well:

$$\mathbf{B_\alpha} =
   \begin{bmatrix}
   \beta_1 & \beta_2 & \dots & \beta_j
   \end{bmatrix}$$

$$\mathbf{B_\beta} =
   \begin{bmatrix}
   \beta_1 & \beta_2 & \dots & \beta_k
   \end{bmatrix}$$

Where:

$$n = j + k$$

Now, our equation becomes:

$$\beta_p = \mathbf{B_\alpha X_\alpha}+\mathbf{B_\beta X_\beta} $$

Where the $\alpha$ vectors contain the positive weights and the $\beta$
vectors, the negative weights. We want to scale up the negative weights
(make them larger, though still negative), so we introduce a scaling
factor, $\lambda$, and set $\beta_p=0$:

$$\mathbf{B_\alpha X_\alpha}+ \lambda \mathbf{B_\beta X_\beta}=0$$

We now solve for $\lambda$:

$$\lambda = - \frac{\mathbf{B_\alpha X_\alpha}}{\mathbf{B_\beta X_\beta}}$$

Assuming a leverage ratio of one, i.e:

$$\sum_{i=1}^j |x_{\alpha,i}| + \sum_{i=1}^k |x_{\beta,i}| = 1$$

We can calculate the net long exposure, using $\lambda$ as a parameter:

$$l = \frac{1-\lambda}{1+\lambda}$$

Below is the graph of net long exposure over time:

![Net long exposure](/assets/ne.png)

And the cumulative return:

![Cumulative return](/assets/betacum2.png)

Wow, Looks a lot better! Ignoring the Great Recession, the return stream
seems very solid, with limited volatility. Below is a table of some
additional strategy information:

| Metric   | Value |
|----------|-------|
| Beta     | 1.8%  |
| Ann. Ret | 4.0%  |
| Ann. Vol | 4.6%  |
| Ret/Vol  | 0.84  |

With a beta of only 1.8%, it\'s clear that our method for reducing beta
exposure works quite well. Still, it\'s surprising that a net long
exposure of such magnitude can still be taken with little to no
correlation to the market. Evidently, there is indeed an excess return
associated with low-beta equities, and quite a large one, at that.

Explanation
-----------

Many academics have tried to explain the structural and behavioral
reasons for the low beta anomaly. The most common explanation put forth
is that due to leverage constraints and borrowing costs, investors seek
out high beta securities in order to achieve a higher natural return. If
high leverage ratios were available to all investors, one might expect
that this mispricing of high beta stocks might go away, as the beta of
any given stock would become less important.

Another possible explanation is that the conflict of interest between
money managers and clients creates an incentive for fund managers to
take excess risk through high beta equities. In good times, managers
collect a performance fee and a management fee while in bad times, only
a management fee. This asymmetric payoff incentives managers to try and
score a big \"win,\" while limited liability prevents managers from ever
losing money on losses.

A third explanation is that high volatility (and thus high beta) stocks
receive more attention from the financial community as they are simply
more interesting to discuss. This interest and attention encourages
increased buying, thus pushing down the expected return of said stocks.

Conclusion
----------

In this post we have shown that there is indeed a significant abnormal
return associated with low beta stocks. This abnormal return can not
only be captured with a long only (and beta exposed) portfolio, but also
a beta neutral one. Despite the less than stellar risk-adjusted return
of the strategy, perhaps the Sharpe ratio can be improved by controlling
sector and style risks in addition to beta exposure. Perhaps one could
also overlay the low beta factor on top of an existing factor strategy
in order to reduce volatility and boost the risk-adjusted return.

That\'s all for now, and thanks for reading! If you\'re interested in
the code and want to play around with it, check it out
[here](https://www.quantopian.com/posts/low-beta-anomaly).
